[BLOG] Add blog post about free-threaded GC in 3.14. (#926)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/free-threaded-gc-3-14.md

---
title: "Unlocking Performance in Python's Free-Threaded Future: GC Optimizations"
authors: [neil-schemenauer]
published: Aug 30, 2025
description: 'A description of the performance optimizations made to the free-threaded garbage collector for Python 3.14.'
category: [Community]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/free-threaded-gc-3-14/fast-gc-snake.jpg
  alt: 'A cartoon of a snake with jet engines, carrying a trash can.'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/free-threaded-gc-3-14/fast-gc-snake.jpg
  imageAlt: 'A cartoon of a snake with jet engines, carrying a trash can.'
---

# Unlocking Performance in Python's Free-Threaded Future: GC Optimizations

## Introduction

The upcoming Python 3.14 release is packed with exciting features and

> improvements. The first release candidate is now available. Regular Python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
improvements. The second release candidate is now available. Regular Python
```

  that sits right before the object's data in memory. This header adds two extra
  machine words to the size of every GC-supporting object.

- **The Free-Threaded GC:** The new free-threaded GC takes a different
  approach. It scraps the PyGC_Head structure and the linked list entirely.
  Instead, it allocates these objects from a special memory heap managed by the
  "mimalloc" library. This allows the GC to find and iterate over all collectible
  objects using mimalloc's data structures, without needing to link them together
  manually.

This design choice has trade-offs. It makes creating and destroying objects
faster because they don't need to be constantly linked and unlinked from a
list. Modern hardware also tends to be slow when iterating over linked lists.
However, without the linked-lists, the free-threaded GC needs to allocate some
working memory to operate, which could be an issue if your system is already
critically low on memory. The default GC, by contrast, can run without
allocating any extra memory.

Another consequence is that the free-threaded GC doesn't support "generations"
or "incremental" collections. These are effective optimizations in the default

> GC that avoids looking at all GC-supporting objects on every collection. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GC that avoid looking at all GC-supporting objects on every collection. For
```

CPython core sprint. The insight is simple: while we can't know _all_ the
roots, we do know the important ones, like the module dictionary (sys.modules)
and the interpreter's call stack.

By marking all objects reachable from these _known_ roots, we can identify a
large set of objects that are definitely alive and exclude them from the more
expensive cycle-finding part of the GC process. Since the fraction of these
objects is typically very high, this initial marking phase provides a
significant performance win.

As a proof-of-concept, I implemented a prototype version of this optimization
for the default build of Python 3.12. The implementation was relatively simple
and yielded some significant performance benefit in terms of reducing GC
collection time. Mark Shannon independently implemented the same kind of
optimization for the default build of Python 3.14a3. Mark's optimization gave
an overall speedup on the [pyperformance
suite](https://pyperformance.readthedocs.io/) of 3% and the most GC heavy
benchmark of that suite got a 50% speedup.

I implemented a version of this "mark-alive" pass for the free-threaded GC as

> well. See the [GitHub PR for
> details](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/128808). For the pyperformance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
well. See [this pull request](https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/128808)
for details. For the pyperformance
```

suite, it shows an overall speedup of 0.7% and a 35% speedup on the most GC
heavy benchmark. Additional benchmark results will be shown later in this
post.

## Optimization 2: Using Software Pre-fetch

Modern CPUs are incredibly fast, but fetching data from main memory is a major
bottleneck. A CPU first-level cache hit might take half a nanosecond, while a
trip to main memory can take 100 nanoseconds—200 times slower. CPUs try to
predict which memory you'll need next (hardware pre-fetching), but this fails
with unpredictable memory access patterns, causing the CPU to stall.

> Inspired by a similar change in the [OCaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inspired by [a similar change in the OCaml
```

GC](https://github.com/ocaml/ocaml/pull/10195), we introduced software
pre-fetching to the mark-alive phase of the free-threaded GC. If we know we're
going to need an object's data soon, we can issue an instruction to the CPU to
start loading it from memory ahead of time.

In our implementation, instead of immediately accessing an object pointer, we
push it into a special FIFO queue called a "pre-fetch buffer." When the pointer
is pushed, we also issue a pre-fetch instruction. We pop pointers from the
other end of the buffer and only then access the object's data. The buffer's
size creates a time window that, when tuned correctly, hides the memory access
latency.

In order to tune the size of the pre-fetch buffer, I created an instrumented
version of the GC that logged pre-fetch buffer operations along with object
access timings. An example histogram produced by this is shown below. More
details about the GC software pre-fetch are contained in the CPython
[internal
documentation](https://github.com/python/cpython/blob/main/InternalDocs/garbage_collector.md#software-prefetch-hinting).

  <figure style={{ textAlign: 'center' }}>
    <img 

>       src="/posts/free-threaded-gc-3-14/prefetch-hist.png"

Reviewer: The physicist in me really wants units on the vertical axis:)

Reviewer: The bins are also a little unusual. Any reason why it's multiples of 25.6 ns, and 13k steps on the x-axis?

Reviewer: If it's hard to change it's not the end of the world, but if it's easy then it may be nice to polish a bit.

smart but turns out to be hard to implement. When allocating a new Python object,
we know the size of the object. However, when it is deallocated, we don't. An
additional problem is that tracking only the memory used by the objects
themselves will fail to account for other memory that is held by those objects.
For example, consider an object that "wraps" a C library data structure. The
Python object itself might be quite small but the library data structure could
be large.

The fix, which was prompted by a user's bug report about performance, was to
make the trigger based on the process memory. Instead of just counting objects,
the free-threaded GC can now query the operating system for the process's total
memory usage, or Resident Set Size (RSS). If the process's memory footprint
hasn't grown significantly since the last collection, the GC can skip running,
avoiding unnecessary work. This is especially beneficial for the free-threaded
GC, which must perform a full collection each time it runs.

This optimization work was initiated based on a bug report about the slower
performance of the free-threaded build on a small benchmark program (see

> [GH-132917](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/132917)). It turned out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[cpython#132917](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/132917)). It turned out
```

benchmark. For that benchmark, the “rss threshold” optimization does essentially
nothing, since GC collection is being manually triggered. For the “all”
version of the benchmark, the “rss threshold” does help since as the tree is
being constructed in memory, automatic GC is triggered less often. The
pre-fetch optimization only provides a small benefit. The default GC has a
[performance issue](https://github.com/python/cpython/issues/129210) in version
3.14 which causes quite poor performance on this benchmark (0.2x the speed of
the base free-threaded GC). This will hopefully be fixed for the 3.15 release.

  <figure style={{ textAlign: 'center' }}>
    <img 
      src="/posts/free-threaded-gc-3-14/gc_big.png"
      alt="Bar chart comparing performance of optimizations on gc_big benchmark."
      style={{position:'relative',left:'15%',width:'70%'}}
    />
  </figure>

  <figure style={{ textAlign: 'center' }}>
    <img 
      src="/posts/free-threaded-gc-3-14/gc_big_tree_all.png"
      alt="Bar chart comparing performance of optimizations on gc_big_tree (all) benchmark."
      style={{position:'relative',left:'15%',width:'70%'}}
    />
  </figure>

> For the “gc_big” benchmark. the collection is being triggered manually and so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the “gc_big” benchmark, the collection is being triggered manually and so
```

memory as well as the effectiveness of the CPU hardware pre-fetch. It also
depends on the layout of objects in memory. If object references have good
spatial locality or at least predicable reference offsets, the hardware caching
and pre-fetch logic will do a good job of hiding memory latency without needing
software pre-fetch hints.

  <figure style={{ textAlign: 'center' }}>
    <img 
      src="/posts/free-threaded-gc-3-14/prefetch_speedup.png"
      alt="Bar chart comparing performance of pre-fetch optimization vs mark-alive."
      style={{position:'relative',left:'15%',width:'70%'}}
    />
  </figure>

## Summary

Benchmarks using GC-intensive programs demonstrate the effectiveness of these
optimizations. The "mark-alive" pass consistently delivers good speedups. The
"rss threshold" optimization significantly reduces the frequency of GC runs,
especially for programs creating many small objects. While software
pre-fetching provides varying benefits depending on the hardware, it provides a
measurable speedup when the working set of objects is large. Considering all
these benchmarks, the overall speedup of the free-threaded GC collection is

> between 2x to 12x times faster than the 3.13 version. These advancements are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between 2x and 12x faster than the 3.13 version. These advancements are
```

(or "between 2 and 12 times faster")
